It was in 1845 that Joseph and Analyzer Russell emigrated from Ireland to Pennsylvania, USA.
They would have five children, among them Charles Tays.
But times were hard, his brother Thomas died at age five.
Before Charles turned nine, two more of his siblings died, then his mother died.
That same year, 1861, the United States became embroiled in a civil war that would send 618,000
to their graves.
Thousands perished on battlefields not far from where the Russians lived and worked.
They would be able to see firsthand the havoc that war wreaks on people, the suffering,
the death.
Young Charles Russell thought often about what happens to the dead.
Most religions held that God created man immortal, and that he made a fiery hell in which to
torment people forever, except those predestined for salvation.
Russell's feelings about such teachings came through and what he wrote.
A God that would use his power to create human beings whom he forenew and predestinated
should be eternally tormented, could be neither wise, just, nor loving.
His standard would be lower than that of many men.
He could never reconcile the teaching of eternal torment with the description of the Bible
of a loving God.
As he examined the creeds of the great churches, when he saw that they taught that the wicked
or a tormented eternally, why he just could not accept that.
The whole culture, religious culture at that time was a matter of believing that God was
a God of vengeance.
And Russell knew that the Bible said, as it does at first John 4.8, God is love.
How could a God of love do this?
And so his faith wavered.
He felt he could do the most good for people through business and philanthropy.
As a preteen, he became his father's partner in a growing chain of clothing stores.
Charles Russell enlarged the business, eventually operating a number of stores by himself.
By age 25, he possessed over $300,000.
The equivalent of $7 million today, yet his search for truth continued.
In 1869, something happened that would help reestablish his faith.
Seemingly by accident one evening, I had dropped into a dusty dingy hall to see if the
handful who met there had anything more sensible to offer than the creeds of the great churches.
The words of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Himself, to the apostles.
There for the first time, I heard something of the views of second Adventists from the
preacher, Mr. Jonas Wendell.
Though his scripture exposition was not entirely clear, it was sufficient under God to reestablish
my wavering faith in the divine inspiration of the Bible.
Now remember at this point, Russell is not an atheist, but he is just discouraged.
He doesn't feel that truth can be found anywhere, and that, sermon by a second Adventist,
was enough to get him to get his well-worn Bible off the shelf and to start digging again.
As we've already seen, the word Trinity doesn't appear anywhere in the Bible.
Fired with enthusiasm, Charles, his father Joseph, and a few acquaintances in Pittsburgh
and Allegheny, formed a class for Bible study.
They would take a subject, they would get a Bible concordance, they would look up every
single scripture that had a bearing on the subject, and then they would write down their
conclusions, and then they would say, all right, this is what the Bible teaches, we are
going to believe that.
After five years of study, the religious thinking of these men had undergone remarkable
change.
Their study of the Bible led them to major conclusions that challenged the prevailing religious views
of the day. For example, while most religions taught that man has a soul, Russell and his associates
concluded that man is a soul, and that the soul can die, and whereas Christendom's churches
teach that the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are one person, these students held
that Jehovah is one God, and not part of a Trinity.
In addition, while some churches were teaching that Christ would return in the flesh, and
that the earth would be destroyed, this small group came to understand that Christ would
return invisibly in the spirit, with the purpose of blessing the obedient mankind.
So it wasn't just philosophizing, just talking about what if, or perhaps this way, but they
were focused on trying to actually find the truth, and the fact that they decided to write
down those conclusions showed that they had a belief that there is some truth to be found.
We only see light when it's Jehovah's time to reveal light.
And so this was the beginning of Jehovah's time to lead his people out of darkness into
the wonderful light.